xfel/conda_envs/README.md, before:

# cctbx.xfel Build Instructions

The conda build environment psana_environment.yml is suitable
for general use and contains the usual CCTBX dependencies plus psana and its
dependencies.

The build steps below were tested on Oct 19, 2022. They should be done in a clean environment: start
a new shell before proceeding.

Note, reading HDF5 data and general crystallographic data is supported with these instructions. Reading XTC data from LCLS requires additional [environment variables](#LCLS-environment).

## Prerequisite: Install Miniconda3 and add mamba

If needed, visit: https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html and install the correct Miniconda
for your platform. Activate your `base` environment and do: `conda install mamba -c conda-forge`.
Mamba is a much faster C++ implementation of conda.

## General build

These steps were tested on a CentOS 7.9 machine with 64 cores. In the
bootstrap.py step you should adjust nproc to suit your environment.

```
$ mkdir cctbx; cd cctbx
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/master/libtbx/auto_build/bootstrap.py
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/master/xfel/conda_envs/psana_environment.yml
$ mamba env create -f psana_environment.yml -p $PWD/conda_base
$ conda activate `pwd`/conda_base
$ python bootstrap.py --builder=xfel --use-conda=$PWD/conda_base --nproc=48 \
    --python=39 --no-boost-src hot update build
$ echo $PWD/build/conda_setpaths.sh
```
To activate the cctbx environment, `source` the script that was printed in the final step.

## LCLS build

Since the `psana` compute nodes do not have internet access, we use `psexport` for everything except `build`.
```
dwpaley@pslogin02:~
$ ssh psexport
[...]
$ cd /reg/d/psdm/<experiment>/scratch/dwpaley
$ mkdir cctbx; cd cctbx
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/master/libtbx/auto_build/bootstrap.py
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/master/xfel/conda_envs/psana_environment.yml
$ mamba env create -f psana_environment.yml -p $PWD/conda_base
$ conda activate $PWD/conda_base
$ python bootstrap.py --builder=xfel --use-conda=$PWD/conda_base --nproc=48 \
    --python=39 --no-boost-src hot update
$ exit
$ ssh psana
[...]
$ cd /reg/d/psdm/<experiment>/scratch/dwpaley/cctbx
$ conda activate $PWD/conda_base
$ python bootstrap.py --builder=xfel --use-conda=$PWD/conda_base --nproc=12 \
    --python=39 --no-boost-src build
$ echo $PWD/build/conda_setpaths.sh
```

## Build with conda compilers

On machines that are old or weird, the system compilers may not work correctly. We can have `bootstrap.py` build
with standardized compilers from conda instead. Replace the step `python bootstrap.py ... build` with the following:
```
$ python bootstrap.py --builder=xfel --use-conda=$PWD/conda_base \
  --config-flags="--compiler=conda" --config-flags="--use_environment_flags" \
  --nproc=10 --python=39 --no-boost-src build
```

## LCLS environment

For LCLS data, when not on the main LCLS servers, additional environment variables are needed so psana can find the XTC streams are stored. Given a folder named `$WORKING`, the XTC streams should be in `$WORKING/<endstation>/<experiment>/xtc`. If the data is older than run 21 (spring 2022), `$WORKING/lcls/ExpNameDb` should exist, with the file `experiment-db.dat`. That file will have entries like `280 CXI cxi78513` to map the numbers in the XTC streams to experiment names. Newer data doesn't need this. Given this folder structure, export these environment variables:

```
export SIT_DATA=$WORKING/lcls
export SIT_ROOT=$SIT_DATA
export SIT_PSDM_DATA=$SIT_DATA
```

Once in place, a simple test to ensure things are working is `detnames exp=<experiment>:run=<run>`. If there are no errors, then psana is configured correctly.

cctbx.xfel uses psana to read data using locator files. The simplest example is below:

```
$ cat example.loc
experiment=cxi78513
run=22
detector_address=CxiDs1.0:Cspad.0
```

This can be used using cctbx.xfel and dials commands, such as `dials.image_viewer example.loc load_models=False`. Most detectors require additional information in the locator files. The full set of options is listed in [FormatXTC in dxtbx](https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/blob/main/src/dxtbx/format/FormatXTC.py) and dervied classes, such as FormatXTCRayonix.py.

# cctbx.xfel tests

The cctbx.xfel regression tests include tests from several repositories.  The below instructions reproduce what we do nightly. If psana is configured, it will be tested as well.

```
$ cd modules
$ conda install -c conda-forge git-lfs
$ git clone https://gitlab.com/cctbx/xfel_regression.git
$ git clone https://github.com/nksauter/LS49.git
$ git clone https://gitlab.com/cctbx/ls49_big_data.git
$ cd xfel_regression
$ git lfs install --local
$ git lfs pull
$ cd ../uc_metrics
$ git lfs install --local
$ git lfs pull
$ cd ../ls49_big_data
$ git lfs install --local
$ git lfs pull
$ cd ../../
$ mkdir test; cd test
$ libtbx.configure xfel_regression LS49 ls49_big_data
$ export OMP_NUM_THREADS=4
$ libtbx.run_tests_parallel module=uc_metrics module=simtbx module=xfel_regression module=LS49 nproc=64
```

Note, bootstrap.py has several 'builders' available that set up which packages are cloned and configured.  The xfel builder will clone uc_metrics for you, but for reference, here's how to get it standalone if needed:

```
$ git clone https://gitlab.com/cctbx/uc_metrics.git
$ libtbx.configure uc_metrics
$ cd `libtbx.show_build_path`; make
```

Commit message:

Fix MPI on XFEL CI for psana (#1040)
Observed MPI failures on CI: "Missing hostname or invalid host/port description in business card". Fixed by adding ucx to Rocky Linux via YUM. Note that installing ucx from conda-forge also worked.

xfel/conda_envs/README.md, after:

# cctbx.xfel Build Instructions

The conda build environment psana_environment.yml is suitable
for general use and contains the usual CCTBX dependencies plus psana and its
dependencies.

The build steps below were tested on Oct 19, 2022. They should be done in a clean environment: start
a new shell before proceeding.

Note, reading HDF5 data and general crystallographic data is supported with these instructions. Reading XTC data from LCLS requires additional [environment variables](#LCLS-environment).

## Prerequisite: Install Miniconda3 and add mamba

If needed, visit: https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html and install the correct Miniconda
for your platform. Activate your `base` environment and do: `conda install mamba -c conda-forge`.
Mamba is a much faster C++ implementation of conda.

## General build

These steps were tested on a CentOS 7.9 machine with 64 cores. In the
bootstrap.py step you should adjust nproc to suit your environment.

```
$ mkdir cctbx; cd cctbx
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/master/libtbx/auto_build/bootstrap.py
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/master/xfel/conda_envs/psana_environment.yml
$ mamba env create -f psana_environment.yml -p $PWD/conda_base
$ conda activate `pwd`/conda_base
$ python bootstrap.py --builder=xfel --use-conda=$PWD/conda_base --nproc=48 \
    --python=39 --no-boost-src hot update build
$ echo $PWD/build/conda_setpaths.sh
```
To activate the cctbx environment, `source` the script that was printed in the final step.

## LCLS build

Since the `psana` compute nodes do not have internet access, we use `psexport` for everything except `build`.
```
dwpaley@pslogin02:~
$ ssh psexport
[...]
$ cd /reg/d/psdm/<experiment>/scratch/dwpaley
$ mkdir cctbx; cd cctbx
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/master/libtbx/auto_build/bootstrap.py
$ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/master/xfel/conda_envs/psana_environment.yml
$ mamba env create -f psana_environment.yml -p $PWD/conda_base
$ conda activate $PWD/conda_base
$ python bootstrap.py --builder=xfel --use-conda=$PWD/conda_base --nproc=48 \
    --python=39 --no-boost-src hot update
$ exit
$ ssh psana
[...]
$ cd /reg/d/psdm/<experiment>/scratch/dwpaley/cctbx
$ conda activate $PWD/conda_base
$ python bootstrap.py --builder=xfel --use-conda=$PWD/conda_base --nproc=12 \
    --python=39 --no-boost-src build
$ echo $PWD/build/conda_setpaths.sh
```

## Build with conda compilers

On machines that are old or weird, the system compilers may not work correctly. We can have `bootstrap.py` build
with standardized compilers from conda instead. Replace the step `python bootstrap.py ... build` with the following:
```
$ python bootstrap.py --builder=xfel --use-conda=$PWD/conda_base \
  --config-flags="--compiler=conda" --config-flags="--use_environment_flags" \
  --nproc=10 --python=39 --no-boost-src build
```

## MPI support

MPI functionality can be sensitive to the details of the system configuration. In one minimal setup (Azure CI on Rocky Linux)
we had to add `ucx` via either YUM or Conda for full MPI function. For a particular cluster environment you may have to consult
a local expert.

## LCLS environment

For LCLS data, when not on the main LCLS servers, additional environment variables are needed so psana can find the XTC streams are stored. Given a folder named `$WORKING`, the XTC streams should be in `$WORKING/<endstation>/<experiment>/xtc`. If the data is older than run 21 (spring 2022), `$WORKING/lcls/ExpNameDb` should exist, with the file `experiment-db.dat`. That file will have entries like `280 CXI cxi78513` to map the numbers in the XTC streams to experiment names. Newer data doesn't need this. Given this folder structure, export these environment variables:

```
export SIT_DATA=$WORKING/lcls
export SIT_ROOT=$SIT_DATA
export SIT_PSDM_DATA=$SIT_DATA
```

Once in place, a simple test to ensure things are working is `detnames exp=<experiment>:run=<run>`. If there are no errors, then psana is configured correctly.

cctbx.xfel uses psana to read data using locator files. The simplest example is below:

```
$ cat example.loc
experiment=cxi78513
run=22
detector_address=CxiDs1.0:Cspad.0
```

This can be used using cctbx.xfel and dials commands, such as `dials.image_viewer example.loc load_models=False`. Most detectors require additional information in the locator files. The full set of options is listed in [FormatXTC in dxtbx](https://github.com/cctbx/dxtbx/blob/main/src/dxtbx/format/FormatXTC.py) and dervied classes, such as FormatXTCRayonix.py.

# cctbx.xfel tests

The cctbx.xfel regression tests include tests from several repositories.  The below instructions reproduce what we do nightly. If psana is configured, it will be tested as well.

```
$ cd modules
$ conda install -c conda-forge git-lfs
$ git clone https://gitlab.com/cctbx/xfel_regression.git
$ git clone https://github.com/nksauter/LS49.git
$ git clone https://gitlab.com/cctbx/ls49_big_data.git
$ cd xfel_regression
$ git lfs install --local
$ git lfs pull
$ cd ../uc_metrics
$ git lfs install --local
$ git lfs pull
$ cd ../ls49_big_data
$ git lfs install --local
$ git lfs pull
$ cd ../../
$ mkdir test; cd test
$ libtbx.configure xfel_regression LS49 ls49_big_data
$ export OMP_NUM_THREADS=4
$ libtbx.run_tests_parallel module=uc_metrics module=simtbx module=xfel_regression module=LS49 nproc=64
```

Note, bootstrap.py has several 'builders' available that set up which packages are cloned and configured.  The xfel builder will clone uc_metrics for you, but for reference, here's how to get it standalone if needed:

```
$ git clone https://gitlab.com/cctbx/uc_metrics.git
$ libtbx.configure uc_metrics
$ cd `libtbx.show_build_path`; make
```
