xfel/small_cell/README.md, before:

## Chemical crystallography using `cctbx.small_cell_process`

This page reproduces the structure determination of mithrene from XFEL diffraction at SACLA.
About 350GB of storage are required. The whole structure determination took about 3 hours
on a 64-core (Opteron 6380) Linux server.

### References

The _small_cell_ indexing algorithm was described in Brewster, 2015:
https://doi.org/10.1107/S1399004714026145 

The experimental structure determination in this README is described in Schriber and Paley, 2021:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04218-3

### Installation of software

<details> 
  <summary>Developer installation</summary>
  
For the work described in Schriber et al., DIALS/CCTBX and dependencies were installed as 
described in the "general build" section here:
https://github.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/tree/master/xfel/conda_envs

For unit cell determination, GSASII must be installed in the conda environment. As of 5/2/2022
we found a problem with a conda-forge distribution of `svn` and thus we alias it to the system
default version. `cd` into the base directory for the installation and do the following:
```
$ svn --version # make sure there is a working system default version
$ old_svn=$(which svn)
$ conda activate $PWD/conda_base
$ mamba install svn -c conda-forge
$ ln -sf $old_svn $(which svn)
$ mamba install gsas2pkg -c briantoby -c conda-forge
$ echo $PWD/conda_base/GSASII > conda_base/lib/python3.*/site-packages/GSASII.pth
```

(Note that `mamba` can be replaced with `conda` but will take longer.)

</details>
  
<details> 
  <summary> Docker installation </summary>
To promote future-safety, a working Docker image will be available from Dockerhub as 
`dwpaley/cctbx:20211012`. Installation instructions are given for a Macbook running MacOS
10.15.7, although processing this full dataset is a space- and compute-intensive task for a
personal laptop.

<a href="https://cntnr.io/running-guis-with-docker-on-mac-os-x-a14df6a76efc">Nils De Moor</a> is
acknowledged for a helpful post on configuring GUI applications via XQuartz.

* Install Docker Desktop as described here: https://docs.docker.com/desktop/mac/install/
* Install XQuartz from here: https://www.xquartz.org. A restart might be needed.
* Start XQuartz, visit Preferences and enable "Security->Allow connections from network clients".
* Install and start `socat` to expose a port for the X server:
```$ conda install socat -c conda-forge -y
$ socat TCP-LISTEN:6000,reuseaddr,fork UNIX-CLIENT:\"$DISPLAY\" &
$ ifconfig en0 |grep '\<inet\>' | awk '{print $2}'
192.168.1.222
$ docker run -e DISPLAY=192.168.1.222:0 gns3/xeyes
```
A pair of eyeballs should be displayed. This confirms Docker can contact the X server. When
Docker applications will need to access the display, follow the example of the last two steps
above to set the `DISPLAY` environment variable.
* Clone the image (approx. 7 GB):
```$ docker clone dwpaley/cctbx:20211012```
* Make sure enough resources are available for the Docker machine. I provided 3/4 of my system
  or 12 cores and 24GB memory.

</details>

### Availability of data

The raw data are available via CXIDB: https://www.cxidb.org/id-189.html

Runs 3133 through 3214 are sufficient to determine the structure. A carefully
refined detector metrology file, `step2_refined2.expt`, is also required.

Transferring the data from CXIDB is much faster using Globus. Steps for the transfer are
provided here:

  <details> <summary>Globus setup and transfer</summary>

    $ export $SACLA_DATA=<destination for raw data>
    $ mkdir -p $SACLA_DATA/data $SACLA_DATA/geom
    $ mkdir ~/globus; cd ~/globus
    $ wget https://downloads.globus.org/globus-connect-personal/linux/stable/globusconnectpersonal-latest.tgz
    $ tar -xf globus*; rm *.tgz; cd globus*
    $ ./globusconnectpersonal -setup --no-gui # authenticate and note the endpoint uuid
    $ export DEST_UUID=<uuid from last step>
    $ export SRC_UUID=4daf664e-f07f-11eb-8329-f56dd2959cb8 # this is the CXIDB Globus endpoint
    $ ./globusconnectpersonal -start -restrict-paths $GLOBUS_DEST & # run in background
    $ conda install globus-cli -c conda-forge
    $ globus login
    $ cd $GLOBUS_DEST
    $ for m in {783133..783214}; do for n in {0..2}; do echo "--recursive $m-$n $m-$n" >> todo.txt; done; done
    $ globus transfer --batch $SRC_UUID://189/sacla2019/data/ $DEST_UUID:$SACLA_DATA/data/ < todo.txt
    $ globus task list # find the task uuid so you can monitor it
    $ globus task event-list <task uuid>
  </details>

Get the refined geometry file for the SACLA data; also make sure the environment variable
`SACLA_DATA` has been set.

```
$ pushd $SACLA_DATA/geom; wget https://www.cxidb.org/data/189/sacla2019/step2_refined2.expt; popd
```


### Run spotfinding

We will use the DIALS spotfinder on 9 selected runs with a lot of hits; this is enough spots to
synthesize a high-quality powder pattern for indexing.

With `run.py` containing:

```
import sys, os
i = int(sys.argv[1])
j = int(sys.argv[2])
phil = sys.argv[3]
cores = sys.argv[4]
root_path = os.getenv('SACLA_DATA')
data_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'data')
geom_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'geom', 'step2_refined2.expt')
h5_path = os.path.join(data_path, f'78{i}-{j}', f'run78{i}-{j}.h5')
out_path = os.path.join(f'{i}-{j}', 'out')
log_path = os.path.join(f'{i}-{j}', 'log')
cmd = \
  f"cctbx.small_cell_process {phil} {h5_path} output.output_dir={out_path} \
  output.logging_dir={log_path} input.reference_geometry={geom_path}"
cmd_mpi = f"mpirun -n {cores} {cmd} mp.method=mpi"
print (cmd_mpi)
os.makedirs(out_path)
os.makedirs(log_path)
os.system(cmd_mpi)
```

and `spotfind.phil` containing:
```
output {
  experiments_filename = %s_imported.expt
  strong_filename = %s_strong.refl
}
dispatch.hit_finder {
  minimum_number_of_reflections = 3
  maximum_number_of_reflections = 40
}
dispatch.index=False
output.composite_output=True
spotfinder.filter.min_spot_size=3
```

do:
```
$ for i in {3192..3200}; do for j in {0..2}; do python run.py $i $j spotfind.phil 64; done; done
```
(but adapt for the number of cores available).
  
---
<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Prepare `run.py` and `spotfind.phil` as above, plus a file `run.sh`:

```
#!/bin/sh

cd /cwd
source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
export SACLA_DATA=/data
python run_integrate.py $1 $2 spotfind.phil 12
```

We run the jobs in containers that have the data and output folders (on the local drive) exposed
via bind mounts:
```
$ chmod +x run.sh
$ for i in {3192..3200}; do for j in {0..2}; do
>   docker run -v $PWD:/cwd -v $SACLA_DATA:/data dwpaley/cctbx:20211012 /cwd/run.sh $i $j
> done; done
```
</details>

---

### Compute powder pattern from spots
  
Spotfinding will run on the 27 selected h5 files within a few minutes. Then prepare a single
set of combined files:
```
$ mkdir combined
$ for d in 3*; do dials.combine_experiments $d/out/*imported.expt $d/out/*strong.refl output.experiments=combined/$d.expt output.reflections=combined/$d.refl reference_from_experiment.detector=0 & done
$ cd combined; dials.combine_experiments *.expt *.refl reference_from_experiment.detector=0
```

Plot the powder pattern:
```
$ cctbx.xfel.powder_from_spots combined.* output.xy_file=powder.xy output.peak_file=peaks.txt
```

This should display an interactive matplotlib window. Zoom, drag and click to identify about 20 d-spacings.
Then run GSASII powder indexing through the `candidate_cells` wrapper:
```
$ cctbx.xfel.candidate_cells nproc=64 input.peak_list=peaks.txt input.powder_pattern=powder.xy search.timeout=300
```

  

---

<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Start an interactive container with the display configured and the working directory bind-mounted:
```
$ ifconfig en0 |grep '\<inet\>' | awk '{print $2}'
192.168.1.225
$ docker run -it -e DISPLAY=192.168.1.225:0 -v $PWD:/cwd dwpaley/cctbx:20211012
# source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
# cd /cwd
```

Then proceed with combining the spotfinding results, plotting the powder pattern, and searching for the
unit cell as described above.

</details>

---
  
The correct cell should be in the top 5 candidates. We will index a single run with the candidate unit 
cells and crystal systems.

### Trial indexing jobs

Make 5 copies of the following indexing phil file, named `1.phil` through `5.phil`:

```
dispatch {
  hit_finder {
    minimum_number_of_reflections = 3
    maximum_number_of_reflections = 40
   }
  }
dispatch {
  refine = True
}
output {
  composite_output=True
  experiments_filename = None
  strong_filename = None
}

spotfinder {
  filter {
    min_spot_size = 3
  }
}
refinement {
  parameterisation {
    crystal {
      fix = all *cell orientation
    }
  }
  reflections {
    outlier {
      algorithm = null auto mcd tukey sauter_poon
    }
  }
}
small_cell {
  powdercell = "1,2,3,90,90,90"
  spacegroup = "P2"
  high_res_limit = 1.2
  min_spots_to_integrate = 3
  faked_mosaicity = 0.1
  spot_connection_epsilon = 0.01
  d_ring_overlap_limit = None
}
```

Manually enter the unit cells and space groups of the top 5 candidates from candidate_cells.

With `run_index.py` containing:
```
import sys, os
i, j = 3192, 0
phil_root = sys.argv[1]
cores = sys.argv[2]
root_path = os.getenv('SACLA_DATA')
data_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'data')
geom_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'geom', 'step2_refined2.expt')
h5_path = os.path.join(data_path, f'78{i}-{j}', f'run78{i}-{j}.h5')
out_path = os.path.join(phil_root, 'out')
log_path = os.path.join(phil_root, 'log')
cmd = \
  f"cctbx.small_cell_process {phil_root}.phil {h5_path} output.output_dir={out_path} \
  output.logging_dir={log_path} input.reference_geometry={geom_path}"
cmd_mpi = f"mpirun -n {cores} {cmd} mp.method=mpi"
print (cmd_mpi)
os.makedirs(out_path)
os.makedirs(log_path)
os.system(cmd_mpi)
```

do

```
$ for n in 1 2 3 4 5; do python run_index.py $n 64; done
```

then count the resulting indexing hits:

```
$ for n in {1..5}; do
    echo
    echo $n
    egrep 'powdercell|spacegroup' $n.phil
    grep real_space_a $n/out/*refined.expt 2>/dev/null|wc -l
  done
```

---

<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Set up the phil files as above. Make a script `run.sh` containing the following:
  
```
#!/bin/sh

cd /cwd
source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
export SACLA_DATA=/data
python run_index.py $1 $2
```
  
And run the jobs in containers with the appropriate bind mounts:
  
```
$ chmod +x run.sh
$ for n in 1 2 3 4 5; do 
>   docker run -v $PWD:/cwd -v $SACLA_DATA:/data dwpaley/cctbx:20211012 /cwd/run.sh $n 12
> done
```
  
Then count the indexing hits as described above.
  
</details>

---
  
  
  
### Integration

After choosing the correct cell, make a new directory for integration scripts and results.
Prepare this file `integrate.phil`:
```
dispatch {
  hit_finder {
    minimum_number_of_reflections = 3
    maximum_number_of_reflections = 40
   }
  }
dispatch {
  refine = True
}
output {
  composite_output=True
  experiments_filename = None
  strong_filename = None
}

spotfinder {
  filter {
    min_spot_size = 3
  }
}
refinement {
  parameterisation {
    crystal {
      fix = all *cell orientation
    }
  }
  reflections {
    outlier {
      algorithm = null auto mcd tukey sauter_poon
    }
  }
}
small_cell {
  powdercell = "5.93762, 7.32461, 29.202, 90, 95.4404, 90"
  spacegroup = "C2"
  high_res_limit = 0.8
  min_spots_to_integrate = 3
  faked_mosaicity = 0.1
  spot_connection_epsilon = 0.004
  d_ring_overlap_limit = None
}
```

And this script `run.py`:
```
import sys, os
i = int(sys.argv[1])
j = int(sys.argv[2])
phil = sys.argv[3]
cores = sys.argv[4]
root_path = os.getenv('SACLA_DATA')
data_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'data')
geom_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'geom', 'step2_refined2.expt')
h5_path = os.path.join(data_path, f'78{i}-{j}', f'run78{i}-{j}.h5')
out_path = os.path.join(f'{i}-{j}', 'out')
log_path = os.path.join(f'{i}-{j}', 'log')
cmd = \
  f"cctbx.small_cell_process integrate.phil {h5_path} output.output_dir={out_path} \
  output.logging_dir={log_path} input.reference_geometry={geom_path}"
cmd_mpi = f"mpirun -n 64 {cmd} mp.method=mpi"
print (cmd_mpi)
os.makedirs(out_path)
os.makedirs(log_path)
os.system(cmd_mpi)
```
Prepare a todo script and run it: [note 1]
```
$ for m in {3133..3214}; do for n in {0..2}; do 
>   echo "python run.py $m $n integrate.phil 64" >> todo.sh
> done; done
$ source todo.sh
```

  
---
<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Prepare `run.py` and `integrate.phil` as above, plus a file `run.sh`:

```
#!/bin/sh

cd /cwd
source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
export SACLA_DATA=/data
python run.py $1 $2 integrate.phil 12
```

Run the jobs as described above for spotfinding:
```
$ chmod +x run.sh
$ for i in {3133..3214}; do for j in {0..2}; do
>   docker run -v $PWD:/cwd -v $SACLA_DATA:/data dwpaley/cctbx:20211012 /cwd/run.sh $i $j
> done; done
```
Optionally, you can instead echo the `docker` commands to a `todo.sh` script as above, e.g. for
running multiple jobs under control of `parallel` or similar.
</details>

---



### Merging

After integration, merging is performed in two steps:

```
$ mkdir merging; cd merging
$ cat > mark1.phil
input.path=../3*/out
dispatch.step_list = input balance model_scaling modify errors_premerge scale statistics_unitcell statistics_beam model_statistics statistics_resolution group errors_merge statistics_intensity merge statistics_intensity_cxi
scaling.algorithm=mark1
scaling.unit_cell=5.93762 7.32461 29.202 90 95.4404 90
scaling.space_group=C2
merging.d_min=1.15
merging.merge_anomalous=True
merging.error.model=errors_from_sample_residuals
statistics.n_bins=20
output.prefix=mark1
output.do_timing=True
output.output_dir=.

$ cat > mark0.phil
input.path=../3*/out
dispatch.step_list = input balance model_scaling modify errors_premerge scale statistics_unitcell statistics_beam model_statistics statistics_resolution group errors_merge statistics_intensity merge statistics_intensity_cxi
scaling.model=mark1_all.mtz
merging.d_min=1.15
merging.merge_anomalous=True
output.do_timing=True
statistics.n_bins=20
merging.error.model=errors_from_sample_residuals
output.prefix=mark0
output.do_timing=True
output.output_dir=.

$ mpirun -n 32 cctbx.xfel.merge mark1.phil
$ mpirun -n 32 cctbx.xfel.merge mark0.phil
$ iotbx.reflection_file_converter mark0_all.mtz --label="Iobs,SIGIobs" --shelx=mark0.hkl
```

At this point, the file mark0.hkl can be used for structure solution. An ins file must be prepared by hand.
The following would be suitable for mithrene in C2/c:

```
TITL mithrene
CELL 1.032066 5.93762 7.32461 29.202 90 95.4404 90
ZERR 8 0 0 0 0 0 0
LATT 7
SYMM -X,+Y,0.5-Z
SFAC C H Se Ag
DISP Ag -0.2289 2.1223 13899.9697
DISP C 0.0087 0.0039 30.8059
DISP H -0 0 0.6385
DISP Se -2.5865 0.5775 2790.4387
UNIT 80 72 8 8
HKLF 4
```

To perform a final round of scaling with a partially completed reference structure
(here combined with reindexing to resolve an indexing ambiguity), save the structure
in standard cif format and do this:
```
$ cat > rtr.phil
input.path=../3*/out
dispatch.step_list = input balance model_scaling modify modify_reindex_to_reference errors_premerge scale statistics_unitcell statistics_beam model_statistics statistics_resolution group errors_merge statistics_intensity merge statistics_intensity_cxi
scaling.model=full.cif
merging.d_min=1.15
merging.merge_anomalous=True
output.do_timing=True
statistics.n_bins=20
merging.error.model=errors_from_sample_residuals
output.prefix=rtr
output.do_timing=True
output.output_dir=.

$ mpirun -n 32 cctbx.xfel.merge rtr.phil
$ iotbx.reflection_file_converter rtr_all.mtz --label="Iobs,SIGIobs" --shelx=rtr.hkl
```

The resulting file `rtr.hkl` contains the final intensities for structure refinement.
  

---
<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Merging is most convenient in an interactive container:
  
```
$ docker run -it -v $PWD:/cwd dwpaley/cctbx:20211012
# source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
# cd /cwd
```
Then proceed with the steps above (but be sure to adjust the # of cores
for mpirun jobs).

</details>

---



### Notes

[Note 1]: To optimize disk access, running a few smaller parallel jobs may be faster.
The utility GNU Parallel is available from conda_forge:
```
$ conda install parallel -c conda-forge
```
and the todo list can be piped into `parallel`:
```
$ cat todo.sh | parallel -j 4
```
to run 4 concurrent jobs (in which case you should modify the `mpirun` command to use 16 tasks apiece).

Commit message:

small_cell readme: add cctbx basics

xfel/small_cell/README.md, after:

## Chemical crystallography using `cctbx.small_cell_process`

This page reproduces the structure determination of mithrene from XFEL diffraction at SACLA.
About 350GB of storage are required. The whole structure determination took about 3 hours
on a 64-core (Opteron 6380) Linux server.

### References

The _small_cell_ indexing algorithm was described in Brewster, 2015:
https://doi.org/10.1107/S1399004714026145 

The experimental structure determination in this README is described in Schriber and Paley, 2021:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04218-3

### Installation of software

<details> 
  <summary>Developer installation</summary>
  
For the work described in Schriber et al., DIALS/CCTBX and dependencies were installed as 
described in the "general build" section here:
https://github.com/cctbx/cctbx_project/tree/master/xfel/conda_envs

For unit cell determination, GSASII must be installed in the conda environment. As of 5/2/2022
we found a problem with a conda-forge distribution of `svn` and thus we alias it to the system
default version. `cd` into the base directory for the installation and do the following:
```
$ svn --version # make sure there is a working system default version
$ old_svn=$(which svn)
$ conda activate $PWD/conda_base
$ mamba install svn -c conda-forge
$ ln -sf $old_svn $(which svn)
$ mamba install gsas2pkg -c briantoby -c conda-forge
$ echo $PWD/conda_base/GSASII > conda_base/lib/python3.*/site-packages/GSASII.pth
```

(Note that `mamba` can be replaced with `conda` but will take longer.)

</details>
  
<details> 
  <summary> Docker installation </summary>
To promote future-safety, a working Docker image will be available from Dockerhub as 
`dwpaley/cctbx:20211012`. Installation instructions are given for a Macbook running MacOS
10.15.7, although processing this full dataset is a space- and compute-intensive task for a
personal laptop.

<a href="https://cntnr.io/running-guis-with-docker-on-mac-os-x-a14df6a76efc">Nils De Moor</a> is
acknowledged for a helpful post on configuring GUI applications via XQuartz.

* Install Docker Desktop as described here: https://docs.docker.com/desktop/mac/install/
* Install XQuartz from here: https://www.xquartz.org. A restart might be needed.
* Start XQuartz, visit Preferences and enable "Security->Allow connections from network clients".
* Install and start `socat` to expose a port for the X server:
```$ conda install socat -c conda-forge -y
$ socat TCP-LISTEN:6000,reuseaddr,fork UNIX-CLIENT:\"$DISPLAY\" &
$ ifconfig en0 |grep '\<inet\>' | awk '{print $2}'
192.168.1.222
$ docker run -e DISPLAY=192.168.1.222:0 gns3/xeyes
```
A pair of eyeballs should be displayed. This confirms Docker can contact the X server. When
Docker applications will need to access the display, follow the example of the last two steps
above to set the `DISPLAY` environment variable.
* Clone the image (approx. 7 GB):
```$ docker clone dwpaley/cctbx:20211012```
* Make sure enough resources are available for the Docker machine. I provided 3/4 of my system
  or 12 cores and 24GB memory.

</details>

### Availability of data

The raw data are available via CXIDB: https://www.cxidb.org/id-189.html

Runs 3133 through 3214 are sufficient to determine the structure. A carefully
refined detector metrology file, `step2_refined2.expt`, is also required.

Transferring the data from CXIDB is much faster using Globus. Steps for the transfer are
provided here:

  <details> <summary>Globus setup and transfer</summary>

    $ export $SACLA_DATA=<destination for raw data>
    $ mkdir -p $SACLA_DATA/data $SACLA_DATA/geom
    $ mkdir ~/globus; cd ~/globus
    $ wget https://downloads.globus.org/globus-connect-personal/linux/stable/globusconnectpersonal-latest.tgz
    $ tar -xf globus*; rm *.tgz; cd globus*
    $ ./globusconnectpersonal -setup --no-gui # authenticate and note the endpoint uuid
    $ export DEST_UUID=<uuid from last step>
    $ export SRC_UUID=4daf664e-f07f-11eb-8329-f56dd2959cb8 # this is the CXIDB Globus endpoint
    $ ./globusconnectpersonal -start -restrict-paths $GLOBUS_DEST & # run in background
    $ conda install globus-cli -c conda-forge
    $ globus login
    $ cd $GLOBUS_DEST
    $ for m in {783133..783214}; do for n in {0..2}; do echo "--recursive $m-$n $m-$n" >> todo.txt; done; done
    $ globus transfer --batch $SRC_UUID://189/sacla2019/data/ $DEST_UUID:$SACLA_DATA/data/ < todo.txt
    $ globus task list # find the task uuid so you can monitor it
    $ globus task event-list <task uuid>
  </details>

Get the refined geometry file for the SACLA data; also make sure the environment variable
`SACLA_DATA` has been set.

```
$ pushd $SACLA_DATA/geom; wget https://www.cxidb.org/data/189/sacla2019/step2_refined2.expt; popd
```

### CCTBX basics

Most cctbx tools are run from the command line using .phil files to configure the job. An
introduction to the phil format is here: http://cctbx.sourceforge.net/libtbx_phil.html

Available phil parameters can be printed by adding the `-c` flag. For example:

```
$ dials.stills_process -c -a2 -e10 | less
```

will output all parameters up to "expert level 10" with help strings (`-a2`) and display them
in a pager (`less`).


    
### Run spotfinding

We will use the DIALS spotfinder on 9 selected runs with a lot of hits; this is enough spots to
synthesize a high-quality powder pattern for indexing.

With `run.py` containing:

```
import sys, os
i = int(sys.argv[1])
j = int(sys.argv[2])
phil = sys.argv[3]
cores = sys.argv[4]
root_path = os.getenv('SACLA_DATA')
data_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'data')
geom_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'geom', 'step2_refined2.expt')
h5_path = os.path.join(data_path, f'78{i}-{j}', f'run78{i}-{j}.h5')
out_path = os.path.join(f'{i}-{j}', 'out')
log_path = os.path.join(f'{i}-{j}', 'log')
cmd = \
  f"cctbx.small_cell_process {phil} {h5_path} output.output_dir={out_path} \
  output.logging_dir={log_path} input.reference_geometry={geom_path}"
cmd_mpi = f"mpirun -n {cores} {cmd} mp.method=mpi"
print (cmd_mpi)
os.makedirs(out_path)
os.makedirs(log_path)
os.system(cmd_mpi)
```

and `spotfind.phil` containing:
```
output {
  experiments_filename = %s_imported.expt
  strong_filename = %s_strong.refl
}
dispatch.hit_finder {
  minimum_number_of_reflections = 3
  maximum_number_of_reflections = 40
}
dispatch.index=False
output.composite_output=True
spotfinder.filter.min_spot_size=3
```

do:
```
$ for i in {3192..3200}; do for j in {0..2}; do python run.py $i $j spotfind.phil 64; done; done
```
(but adapt for the number of cores available).
  
---
<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Prepare `run.py` and `spotfind.phil` as above, plus a file `run.sh`:

```
#!/bin/sh

cd /cwd
source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
export SACLA_DATA=/data
python run_integrate.py $1 $2 spotfind.phil 12
```

We run the jobs in containers that have the data and output folders (on the local drive) exposed
via bind mounts:
```
$ chmod +x run.sh
$ for i in {3192..3200}; do for j in {0..2}; do
>   docker run -v $PWD:/cwd -v $SACLA_DATA:/data dwpaley/cctbx:20211012 /cwd/run.sh $i $j
> done; done
```
</details>

---

### Compute powder pattern from spots
  
Spotfinding will run on the 27 selected h5 files within a few minutes. Then prepare a single
set of combined files:
```
$ mkdir combined
$ for d in 3*; do dials.combine_experiments $d/out/*imported.expt $d/out/*strong.refl output.experiments=combined/$d.expt output.reflections=combined/$d.refl reference_from_experiment.detector=0 & done
$ cd combined; dials.combine_experiments *.expt *.refl reference_from_experiment.detector=0
```

Plot the powder pattern:
```
$ cctbx.xfel.powder_from_spots combined.* output.xy_file=powder.xy output.peak_file=peaks.txt
```

This should display an interactive matplotlib window. Zoom, drag and click to identify about 20 d-spacings.
Then run GSASII powder indexing through the `candidate_cells` wrapper:
```
$ cctbx.xfel.candidate_cells nproc=64 input.peak_list=peaks.txt input.powder_pattern=powder.xy search.timeout=300
```

  

---

<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Start an interactive container with the display configured and the working directory bind-mounted:
```
$ ifconfig en0 |grep '\<inet\>' | awk '{print $2}'
192.168.1.225
$ docker run -it -e DISPLAY=192.168.1.225:0 -v $PWD:/cwd dwpaley/cctbx:20211012
# source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
# cd /cwd
```

Then proceed with combining the spotfinding results, plotting the powder pattern, and searching for the
unit cell as described above.

</details>

---
  
The correct cell should be in the top 5 candidates. We will index a single run with the candidate unit 
cells and crystal systems.

### Trial indexing jobs

Make 5 copies of the following indexing phil file, named `1.phil` through `5.phil`:

```
dispatch {
  hit_finder {
    minimum_number_of_reflections = 3
    maximum_number_of_reflections = 40
   }
  }
dispatch {
  refine = True
}
output {
  composite_output=True
  experiments_filename = None
  strong_filename = None
}

spotfinder {
  filter {
    min_spot_size = 3
  }
}
refinement {
  parameterisation {
    crystal {
      fix = all *cell orientation
    }
  }
  reflections {
    outlier {
      algorithm = null auto mcd tukey sauter_poon
    }
  }
}
small_cell {
  powdercell = "1,2,3,90,90,90"
  spacegroup = "P2"
  high_res_limit = 1.2
  min_spots_to_integrate = 3
  faked_mosaicity = 0.1
  spot_connection_epsilon = 0.01
  d_ring_overlap_limit = None
}
```

Manually enter the unit cells and space groups of the top 5 candidates from candidate_cells.

With `run_index.py` containing:
```
import sys, os
i, j = 3192, 0
phil_root = sys.argv[1]
cores = sys.argv[2]
root_path = os.getenv('SACLA_DATA')
data_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'data')
geom_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'geom', 'step2_refined2.expt')
h5_path = os.path.join(data_path, f'78{i}-{j}', f'run78{i}-{j}.h5')
out_path = os.path.join(phil_root, 'out')
log_path = os.path.join(phil_root, 'log')
cmd = \
  f"cctbx.small_cell_process {phil_root}.phil {h5_path} output.output_dir={out_path} \
  output.logging_dir={log_path} input.reference_geometry={geom_path}"
cmd_mpi = f"mpirun -n {cores} {cmd} mp.method=mpi"
print (cmd_mpi)
os.makedirs(out_path)
os.makedirs(log_path)
os.system(cmd_mpi)
```

do

```
$ for n in 1 2 3 4 5; do python run_index.py $n 64; done
```

then count the resulting indexing hits:

```
$ for n in {1..5}; do
    echo
    echo $n
    egrep 'powdercell|spacegroup' $n.phil
    grep real_space_a $n/out/*refined.expt 2>/dev/null|wc -l
  done
```

---

<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Set up the phil files as above. Make a script `run.sh` containing the following:
  
```
#!/bin/sh

cd /cwd
source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
export SACLA_DATA=/data
python run_index.py $1 $2
```
  
And run the jobs in containers with the appropriate bind mounts:
  
```
$ chmod +x run.sh
$ for n in 1 2 3 4 5; do 
>   docker run -v $PWD:/cwd -v $SACLA_DATA:/data dwpaley/cctbx:20211012 /cwd/run.sh $n 12
> done
```
  
Then count the indexing hits as described above.
  
</details>

---
  
  
  
### Integration

After choosing the correct cell, make a new directory for integration scripts and results.
Prepare this file `integrate.phil`:
```
dispatch {
  hit_finder {
    minimum_number_of_reflections = 3
    maximum_number_of_reflections = 40
   }
  }
dispatch {
  refine = True
}
output {
  composite_output=True
  experiments_filename = None
  strong_filename = None
}

spotfinder {
  filter {
    min_spot_size = 3
  }
}
refinement {
  parameterisation {
    crystal {
      fix = all *cell orientation
    }
  }
  reflections {
    outlier {
      algorithm = null auto mcd tukey sauter_poon
    }
  }
}
small_cell {
  powdercell = "5.93762, 7.32461, 29.202, 90, 95.4404, 90"
  spacegroup = "C2"
  high_res_limit = 0.8
  min_spots_to_integrate = 3
  faked_mosaicity = 0.1
  spot_connection_epsilon = 0.004
  d_ring_overlap_limit = None
}
```

And this script `run.py`:
```
import sys, os
i = int(sys.argv[1])
j = int(sys.argv[2])
phil = sys.argv[3]
cores = sys.argv[4]
root_path = os.getenv('SACLA_DATA')
data_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'data')
geom_path = os.path.join(root_path, 'geom', 'step2_refined2.expt')
h5_path = os.path.join(data_path, f'78{i}-{j}', f'run78{i}-{j}.h5')
out_path = os.path.join(f'{i}-{j}', 'out')
log_path = os.path.join(f'{i}-{j}', 'log')
cmd = \
  f"cctbx.small_cell_process integrate.phil {h5_path} output.output_dir={out_path} \
  output.logging_dir={log_path} input.reference_geometry={geom_path}"
cmd_mpi = f"mpirun -n 64 {cmd} mp.method=mpi"
print (cmd_mpi)
os.makedirs(out_path)
os.makedirs(log_path)
os.system(cmd_mpi)
```
Prepare a todo script and run it: [note 1]
```
$ for m in {3133..3214}; do for n in {0..2}; do 
>   echo "python run.py $m $n integrate.phil 64" >> todo.sh
> done; done
$ source todo.sh
```

  
---
<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Prepare `run.py` and `integrate.phil` as above, plus a file `run.sh`:

```
#!/bin/sh

cd /cwd
source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
export SACLA_DATA=/data
python run.py $1 $2 integrate.phil 12
```

Run the jobs as described above for spotfinding:
```
$ chmod +x run.sh
$ for i in {3133..3214}; do for j in {0..2}; do
>   docker run -v $PWD:/cwd -v $SACLA_DATA:/data dwpaley/cctbx:20211012 /cwd/run.sh $i $j
> done; done
```
Optionally, you can instead echo the `docker` commands to a `todo.sh` script as above, e.g. for
running multiple jobs under control of `parallel` or similar.
</details>

---



### Merging

After integration, merging is performed in two steps:

```
$ mkdir merging; cd merging
$ cat > mark1.phil
input.path=../3*/out
dispatch.step_list = input balance model_scaling modify errors_premerge scale statistics_unitcell statistics_beam model_statistics statistics_resolution group errors_merge statistics_intensity merge statistics_intensity_cxi
scaling.algorithm=mark1
scaling.unit_cell=5.93762 7.32461 29.202 90 95.4404 90
scaling.space_group=C2
merging.d_min=1.15
merging.merge_anomalous=True
merging.error.model=errors_from_sample_residuals
statistics.n_bins=20
output.prefix=mark1
output.do_timing=True
output.output_dir=.

$ cat > mark0.phil
input.path=../3*/out
dispatch.step_list = input balance model_scaling modify errors_premerge scale statistics_unitcell statistics_beam model_statistics statistics_resolution group errors_merge statistics_intensity merge statistics_intensity_cxi
scaling.model=mark1_all.mtz
merging.d_min=1.15
merging.merge_anomalous=True
output.do_timing=True
statistics.n_bins=20
merging.error.model=errors_from_sample_residuals
output.prefix=mark0
output.do_timing=True
output.output_dir=.

$ mpirun -n 32 cctbx.xfel.merge mark1.phil
$ mpirun -n 32 cctbx.xfel.merge mark0.phil
$ iotbx.reflection_file_converter mark0_all.mtz --label="Iobs,SIGIobs" --shelx=mark0.hkl
```

At this point, the file mark0.hkl can be used for structure solution. An ins file must be prepared by hand.
The following would be suitable for mithrene in C2/c:

```
TITL mithrene
CELL 1.032066 5.93762 7.32461 29.202 90 95.4404 90
ZERR 8 0 0 0 0 0 0
LATT 7
SYMM -X,+Y,0.5-Z
SFAC C H Se Ag
DISP Ag -0.2289 2.1223 13899.9697
DISP C 0.0087 0.0039 30.8059
DISP H -0 0 0.6385
DISP Se -2.5865 0.5775 2790.4387
UNIT 80 72 8 8
HKLF 4
```

To perform a final round of scaling with a partially completed reference structure
(here combined with reindexing to resolve an indexing ambiguity), save the structure
in standard cif format and do this:
```
$ cat > rtr.phil
input.path=../3*/out
dispatch.step_list = input balance model_scaling modify modify_reindex_to_reference errors_premerge scale statistics_unitcell statistics_beam model_statistics statistics_resolution group errors_merge statistics_intensity merge statistics_intensity_cxi
scaling.model=full.cif
merging.d_min=1.15
merging.merge_anomalous=True
output.do_timing=True
statistics.n_bins=20
merging.error.model=errors_from_sample_residuals
output.prefix=rtr
output.do_timing=True
output.output_dir=.

$ mpirun -n 32 cctbx.xfel.merge rtr.phil
$ iotbx.reflection_file_converter rtr_all.mtz --label="Iobs,SIGIobs" --shelx=rtr.hkl
```

The resulting file `rtr.hkl` contains the final intensities for structure refinement.
  

---
<details> <summary> Docker instructions </summary>

Merging is most convenient in an interactive container:
  
```
$ docker run -it -v $PWD:/cwd dwpaley/cctbx:20211012
# source /img/build/conda_setpaths.sh
# cd /cwd
```
Then proceed with the steps above (but be sure to adjust the # of cores
for mpirun jobs).

</details>

---



### Notes

[Note 1]: To optimize disk access, running a few smaller parallel jobs may be faster.
The utility GNU Parallel is available from conda_forge:
```
$ conda install parallel -c conda-forge
```
and the todo list can be piped into `parallel`:
```
$ cat todo.sh | parallel -j 4
```
to run 4 concurrent jobs (in which case you should modify the `mpirun` command to use 16 tasks apiece).
